Documentation/Explanation
Topic – Understanding socioeconomic inequality through historical census data in the United States from the 1950s to the 2000s
Description/Data – Basically what I did for this project was I used the U.S. Census database to collect data from both the 1950 and 2000
census. The data I got from the 1950 census was much more difficult to deal with as it came in the form of scanned pictures of data. 
To use this data I would have to manually type it in to something else such as excel. The 2000 census data was much easier as it came 
in the form of datasets but for some of the data I used I still had to manually copy it due to how specific I needed the data to be. 
I wanted to use the data from these two censuses to compare how inequalities have changed in the United States. I think this was a 
critical period in U.S. history.  World War 2 had just ended, the 19th had been passed not too long ago, the civil rights movement 
ended during these times, and people had been recovering from the 1929-1941 great depression. 

Conception – The start of this project was rather easy. It wasn’t too hard to find data I could use but a big issue I had was what data 
to use. There is so much data in the 1950 census and even more in the 2000 census that I struggled deciding which data would be best 
for this project. I also did not choose my inequality topics that I would focus on until I had looked through some census data so with 
all this data it was difficult to decide what subtopics to focus on. When using the 1950 census data I had to copy it into an excel 
sheet because they only have scanned images of the data. This made it time consuming and difficult to deal with. 

Creating the project – Probably the biggest problem I had to deal with throughout this project was the fact that the data on these 
censuses were so different. The data collection methods were so far apart from each other that it was hard to use data from each census
and compare them to each other. For example, the 1950 census would group percentiles of populations by an upper income limit such as 
500 or 2000. The 2000 census however, would do the opposite. They would group the percentiles first then decide the upper limit that 
these percentiles have. This made it very difficult to compare data from the two censuses and I would have to resort to some math and 
problem solving to decide how I was going to deal with it. The coding to create the graphs was also a little complicated. I had a basic 
knowledge because of this class but I have never before used jupyter notebook and have also never coded in python this way so it took me
a lot more time than I was happy with to create these graphs. If I had been better at this then I believe I could have used more data 
and done a better job overall on this project. 

Project results – For my first topic of looking at income inequality changes from 1950-2000, I didn’t see a crazy difference. 
Especially when dealing up to the 90th percentile as can be seen on the graphs on my jupyter notebook file, the disparities in the 
income across percentiles did not change much. They were still terrible however, with the top 10 percent making well over 10 times what
the bottom 10 percent were making. A big issue with this was that I believe that income inequality did change dramatically and made the 
top few percent much richer than everyone else but it is just difficult to see this with the U.S. census data. And the reason I believe
that there was an income inequality change is because of the previous research I did about this topic before actually starting this 
project. Using the census data though, the 2000 census did not show higher than the 95th percentile and they established a lower limit 
of income instead of a higher limit. This means that I would really have no idea what the average income of the top 5 percent was and
because I don’t know this it is hard to see this income inequality shift that I believe did happen especially among the top few percent 
of earners in the U.S. For my second topic I focused on household income inequality across race. There were two issues I had to deal 
with here, the first being the difference in data collection just like the previous topic and the second being the fact that in 1950 
the only 2 races on the census for this topic were white and nonwhite. This is because only 99.5% of the population was either white 
or black so in the 1950 census data, nonwhite is referring almost entirely to black Americans. In this topic I found significant 
changes with black Americans doing much better in 2000 income wise than in 1950 in comparison to white Americans. Also  in 2000, 
Asian and Pacific Islander were the highest household income by a significant amount. Hispanics did only slightly better than black 
Americans. Overall I think these changes show that income inequality across race is not as bad as it used to be but in 2000 it was 
still an issue and even today is still an issue. 

Reflections – In this class I learned a lot about technology can be used to study humanities. This is not something I had ever 
really thought about on my own and it was interesting to see that we can really study inequalities so much more efficiently by using 
data and technology. Understanding these inequalities allows us to make better decisions now and not allow these things to happen again.
I would say that learning all of these ideas through this class is what led me to choosing this topic. If I had to do this project 
again or one similar to it there are a lot of things that I would change. First I would try and use more years in my data collection 
because I think this just leads to a more accurate understanding of this data means. I would also try and use more recent data. I 
know this may in a way defeat the purpose of studying inequalities across time if I don’t go that far back in time but more recent data 
is just so much easier to work with. Because of this I could accomplish much more than if I was using older harder to work with data. 
I didn’t end up doing everything I wanted to, the biggest thing being my third inequality topic. I wanted to see the changed in 
education inequality across races through census data but I was having a lot of difficult comparing the data from the two censuses and 
visually representing the comparisons. Overall this was still a great learning experience of a project and it really opened my mind to 
the digital humanities world. 




Citations
Bureau, U. C. (2024, May 7). Census.gov. https://www.census.gov/ 

Massey, Douglas & Fischer, Mary. (2003). The Geography of Inequality in the United States, 1950-2000. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs. 2003. 1-40. 10.1353/urb.2003.0012.

